A central goal of modern cryptography, in contrast to classical cryptography, is the
development of rigorous definitions of security based on the precise mathematical
models and assumptions that underlie cryptographic constructions. In this chapter, we
develop some of the key ideas behind this approach. We begin by discussing the syntax
of private key encryption, which specifies the functionality of an encryption scheme
and the ways in which the communicating parties are assumed to behave. We then
discuss the threat model, which characterizes the power of the adversary who is
attacking the scheme. After establishing a definition of security, we show that the
one time pad satisfies this definition. We also explore the inherent limitations of
information theoretic security and thereby motivate the computational approach that
will be developed in the rest of the book. The treatment here is relatively informal
with the aim of building intuition rather than providing a completely rigorous
development. A thorough development of private key encryption is given in later
chapters. We conclude by considering historical ciphers and showing that they do
not satisfy reasonable definitions of security. Two classical ciphers serve as our
primary examples throughout this chapter and will be used repeatedly in later
chapters as well. The first of these ciphers is the shift cipher. This scheme works
by shifting every letter of the plaintext by a fixed amount. More formally, we can
identify the letters of the English alphabet with the integers in the set of numbers
from zero through twenty five. The key in the shift cipher is a number between zero
and twenty five. To encrypt a message, each letter of the plaintext is shifted forward
by the key with wraparound. For example, if the key is three then a maps to d and
b maps to e and so on. Decryption reverses the process by shifting each letter of the
ciphertext backward by the key. The second classical cipher we consider is the mono
alphabetic substitution cipher. Here the key defines an arbitrary mapping from each
letter to some other letter. To encrypt a message, each letter of the plaintext is
replaced by the corresponding letter as given by the key. Encryption is reversed by
applying the inverse mapping. The key space of the substitution cipher is much larger
than that of the shift cipher. In particular there are twenty six factorial possible
keys rather than merely twenty six. Despite this the substitution cipher can be broken
relatively easily using techniques of frequency analysis as we will show.
